#summary Example usage of the zrbackup script.

= Example Usage =

*WARNING: This script creates ZFS filesystems, snapshots, and runs rsync with the "--delete" option. REVIEW IT AND TEST IT THOROUGHLY BEFORE USING IT ON ANY PRODUCTION SYSTEMS.*

On the OpenSolaris machine, a ZFS pool named "backup1a" was created and mounted at "/backup1a."

{{{
NAME       SIZE  ALLOC   FREE    CAP  DEDUP  HEALTH  ALTROOT
backup1a  36.2T  10.3T  25.9T    28%  1.02x  ONLINE  -

NAME                      USED  AVAIL  REFER  MOUNTPOINT
backup1a                 9.28T  22.7T  6.76T  /backup1a
}}}

A copy of the zrbackup script was placed at "/backup1a/zrbackup."

In the same directory, a text file named "backup-hosts" was created containing a list of hosts, one per line, that will be included when the script is executed.

{{{
dns1
}}}

You may also have an exclude file that's passed to rsync, it should be named "backup-exclude-(host)" (for the host dns1, it would be named "backup-exclude-dns1").

The name of the ZFS pool and the file containing the hosts may be changed by altering the FILESYSTEM and BACKUPHOSTS variables at the beginning of the script.

The user the script is running as must be allowed to connect to each of the hosts, using certificate authentication if you would like to avoid having to supply a password each time it connects.

{{{
[root@backup1 backup1a]# ./zrbackup
Backing up host: dns1
  Creating filesystem for host.
  Mountpoint: /
    Creating directory for mountpoint.
  Mountpoint: /boot
    Creating directory for mountpoint.
  Creating 'Latest' snapshot... done.
  Creating 'FirstOfTheYear' snapshot... done.
  Creating 'FirstOfTheMonth' snapshot... done.
  Creating 'FirstOfTheDay' snapshot... done.
}}}

After executing for the first time, a new zfs volume will be created:

{{{
NAME                      USED  AVAIL  REFER  MOUNTPOINT
backup1a                 9.28T  22.7T  6.76T  /backup1a
backup1a/dns1            1.73G  22.7T  1.72G  /backup1a/dns1
}}}

In that volume, you'll find a number of symbolic links and a directory for each of mountpoints on the targetted host:

{{{

lrwxrwxrwx  1 root root 49 2010-07-21 06:23 FirstOfTheDay -> /backup1a/dns1/.zfs/snapshot/20100721/mountpoints
lrwxrwxrwx  1 root root 47 2010-07-20 09:36 FirstOfTheMonth -> /backup1a/dns1/.zfs/snapshot/201007/mountpoints
lrwxrwxrwx  1 root root 45 2010-07-20 09:36 FirstOfTheYear -> /backup1a/dns1/.zfs/snapshot/2010/mountpoints
lrwxrwxrwx  1 root root 56 2010-07-21 06:23 Latest -> /backup1a/dns1/.zfs/snapshot/20100721-062351/mountpoints
drwxr-xr-x  4 root root  7 2010-07-20 09:36 mountpoints
}}}

Inside the mountpoints directory, will be one directory for each of the mounted ext3 filesystems on the targetted host, along with a log of the output of the last rsync command, and a file containing the last date/time of the backup:

{{{
drwxr-xr-x  3 root root    3 2010-07-20 09:36 boot
-rw-r--r--  1 root root  127 2010-07-21 06:23 boot-rsync.log
-rw-r--r--  1 root root   41 2010-07-21 06:23 last-backup.txt
drwxr-xr-x 22 root root   27 2010-07-15 14:29 root
-rw-r--r--  1 root root 3491 2010-07-21 06:23 root-rsync.log
}}}

Old snapshots are pruned according to the values in the hostdefaults function, optionally overridden per-host in a file named $HOST-settings.

At the beginning of its execution, zrbackup looks for a file named zrbackup-preflight and will execute it if it exists and is marked as executable. At the end of execution, it will look for and execute zrbackup-postflight.

Similar scripts are available for each individual host, and should be named $HOST-preflight and $host-postflight. In our case, we use these to shutdown and restart a MySQL slave server in order to get a consistent backup of the InnoDB logs and data files.

This script has been tested with zfs-fuse on Linux, and  works with the exception of the symbolic links that point to the snapshots in the .zfs directory.